README.md, before:

![logo](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/pomponchik/metacode/develop/docs/assets/logo_3.svg)

[![Downloads](https://static.pepy.tech/badge/metacode/month)](https://pepy.tech/project/metacode)
[![Downloads](https://static.pepy.tech/badge/metacode)](https://pepy.tech/project/metacode)
[![Coverage Status](https://coveralls.io/repos/github/pomponchik/metacode/badge.svg?branch=main)](https://coveralls.io/github/pomponchik/metacode?branch=main)
[![Lines of code](https://sloc.xyz/github/pomponchik/metacode/?category=code)](https://github.com/boyter/scc/)
[![Hits-of-Code](https://hitsofcode.com/github/pomponchik/metacode?branch=main&label=Hits-of-Code&exclude=docs/)](https://hitsofcode.com/github/pomponchik/metacode/view?branch=main)
[![Test-Package](https://github.com/pomponchik/metacode/actions/workflows/tests_and_coverage.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/pomponchik/metacode/actions/workflows/tests_and_coverage.yml)
[![Python versions](https://img.shields.io/pypi/pyversions/metacode.svg)](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/metacode)
[![PyPI version](https://badge.fury.io/py/metacode.svg)](https://badge.fury.io/py/metacode)
[![Checked with mypy](http://www.mypy-lang.org/static/mypy_badge.svg)](http://mypy-lang.org/)
[![Ruff](https://img.shields.io/endpoint?url=https://raw.githubusercontent.com/astral-sh/ruff/main/assets/badge/v2.json)](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff)
[![DeepWiki](https://deepwiki.com/badge.svg)](https://deepwiki.com/pomponchik/metacode)

Many source code analysis tools use comments in a special format to mark it up. This is an important part of the Python ecosystem, but there is still no single standard around it. This library offers such a standard.


## Table of contents

- [**Why?**](#why)
- [**The language**](#the-language)
- [**Installation**](#installation)
- [**Usage**](#usage)


## Why?

In the Python ecosystem, there are many tools dealing with source code: linters, test coverage collection systems, and many others. Many of them use special comments, and as a rule, the style of these comments is very similar. Here are some examples:

- [`Ruff`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/linter/#error-suppression), [`Vulture`](https://github.com/jendrikseipp/vulture?tab=readme-ov-file#flake8-noqa-comments) — `# noqa`, `# noqa: E741, F841`.
- [`Black`](https://black.readthedocs.io/en/stable/usage_and_configuration/the_basics.html#ignoring-sections) and [`Ruff`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/formatter/#format-suppression) — `# fmt: on`, `# fmt: off`.
- [`Mypy`](https://discuss.python.org/t/ignore-mypy-specific-type-errors/58535) — `# type: ignore`, `type: ignore[error-code]`.
- [`Coverage`](https://coverage.readthedocs.io/en/7.13.0/excluding.html#default-exclusions) — `# pragma: no cover`, `# pragma: no branch`.
- [`Isort`](https://pycqa.github.io/isort/docs/configuration/action_comments.html) — `# isort: skip`, `# isort: off`.
- [`Bandit`](https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/config.html#suppressing-individual-lines) — `# nosec`.

... and a lot others.

They seem very similar. But you know what? *There is no single standard for such comments*. Seriously.

The internal implementation of reading such comments is also different. Someone uses regular expressions, someone uses even more primitive string processing tools, and someone uses full-fledged parsers, including the Python parser or even written from scratch.

As a result, as a user, you need to remember the rules by which comments are written for each specific tool. And at the same time, you can't be sure that things like double comments (when you want to leave 2 comments for different tools in one line of code) will work in principle. And as the creator of such tools, you are faced with a seemingly simple task — just to read a comment — and find out for yourself that it suddenly turns out to be quite difficult, and there are many possible mistakes.

This is exactly the problem that this library solves. It describes a simple and intuitive standard for action comments, and also offers a ready-made parser that creators of other tools can use. The standard offered by this library is based entirely on a subset of the Python syntax and can be easily reimplemented even if you do not want to use this library directly.


## The language

So, this library offers a language for action comments. Its syntax is a subset of Python syntax, but without Python semantics, as full-fledged execution does not occur. The purpose of the language is simply to provide the developer with the content of the comment in a convenient way, if it is written in a compatible format. If the comment format is not compatible with the parser, it is ignored.

From the point of view of the language, any meaningful comment can consist of 3 elements:

- **Key**. This is usually the name of the specific tool for which this comment is intended, but in some cases it may be something else. This can be any string allowed as an identifier in Python.
- **Action**. The short name of the action that you want to link to this line. Also, only the allowed Python identifier.
- **List of arguments**. These are often some kind of identifiers of specific linting rules or other arguments associated with this action. The list of possible data types described below.

Consider a comment designed to ignore a specific mypy rule:

```
# type: ignore[error-code]
└-key-┘└action⊥arguments-┘
```

> ↑ The key here is the word `type`, that is, what you see before the colon. The action is the `ignore` word, that is, what comes before the square brackets, but after the colon. Finally, the list of arguments is what is in square brackets, in this case, there is only one argument in it: `error-code`.

Simplified writing is also possible, without a list of arguments:

```
# type: ignore
└-key-┘└action┘
```

> ↑ In this case, the parser assumes that there is an argument list, but it is empty.

The number of arguments in the list is unlimited, they can be separated by commas. Here are the valid data types for arguments:

- Valid Python identifiers. They are interpreted as strings.
- Two valid Python identifiers, separated by the `-` symbol, like this: `error-code`. There can also be any number of spaces between them, they will be ignored. Interpreted as a single string.
- String literals.
- Numeric literals (`int`, `float`, `complex`).
- Boolean literals (`True` and `False`).
- `None`.
- `...` (ellipsis).
- Any other Python-compatible code. This is disabled by default, but you can force the mode of reading such code and get descriptions for any inserts of such code in the form of `AST` objects, after which you can somehow process it yourself.

The syntax of all these data types is completely similar to the Python original (except that you can't use multi-line writing options). Over time, it is possible to extend the possible syntax of metacode, but this template will always be supported.

If you scroll through this text [above](#why) to the examples of action comments from various tools, you may notice that the syntax of most of them (but not all) is it can be described using `metacode`, and if not, it can be easily adapted to `metacode`. Read on to learn how to use a ready-made parser in practice.


## Installation

Install it:

```bash
pip install metacode
```

You can also quickly try out this and other packages without having to install using [instld](https://github.com/pomponchik/instld).


## Usage

The parser offered by this library is just one function that is imported like this:

```python
from metacode import parse
```

To use it, you need to extract the text of the comment in some third-party way (preferably, but not necessarily, without the # symbol at the beginning) and pass it, and the expected key must also be passed as the second argument. As a result, you will receive a list of the contents of all the comments that were parsed:

```python
parse('type: ignore[error-code]')
```

Commit message:

Add support for multiple comments in metacode format

README.md, after:

![logo](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/pomponchik/metacode/develop/docs/assets/logo_3.svg)

[![Downloads](https://static.pepy.tech/badge/metacode/month)](https://pepy.tech/project/metacode)
[![Downloads](https://static.pepy.tech/badge/metacode)](https://pepy.tech/project/metacode)
[![Coverage Status](https://coveralls.io/repos/github/pomponchik/metacode/badge.svg?branch=main)](https://coveralls.io/github/pomponchik/metacode?branch=main)
[![Lines of code](https://sloc.xyz/github/pomponchik/metacode/?category=code)](https://github.com/boyter/scc/)
[![Hits-of-Code](https://hitsofcode.com/github/pomponchik/metacode?branch=main&label=Hits-of-Code&exclude=docs/)](https://hitsofcode.com/github/pomponchik/metacode/view?branch=main)
[![Test-Package](https://github.com/pomponchik/metacode/actions/workflows/tests_and_coverage.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/pomponchik/metacode/actions/workflows/tests_and_coverage.yml)
[![Python versions](https://img.shields.io/pypi/pyversions/metacode.svg)](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/metacode)
[![PyPI version](https://badge.fury.io/py/metacode.svg)](https://badge.fury.io/py/metacode)
[![Checked with mypy](http://www.mypy-lang.org/static/mypy_badge.svg)](http://mypy-lang.org/)
[![Ruff](https://img.shields.io/endpoint?url=https://raw.githubusercontent.com/astral-sh/ruff/main/assets/badge/v2.json)](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff)
[![DeepWiki](https://deepwiki.com/badge.svg)](https://deepwiki.com/pomponchik/metacode)

Many source code analysis tools use comments in a special format to mark it up. This is an important part of the Python ecosystem, but there is still no single standard around it. This library offers such a standard.


## Table of contents

- [**Why?**](#why)
- [**The language**](#the-language)
- [**Installation**](#installation)
- [**Usage**](#usage)


## Why?

In the Python ecosystem, there are many tools dealing with source code: linters, test coverage collection systems, and many others. Many of them use special comments, and as a rule, the style of these comments is very similar. Here are some examples:

- [`Ruff`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/linter/#error-suppression), [`Vulture`](https://github.com/jendrikseipp/vulture?tab=readme-ov-file#flake8-noqa-comments) — `# noqa`, `# noqa: E741, F841`.
- [`Black`](https://black.readthedocs.io/en/stable/usage_and_configuration/the_basics.html#ignoring-sections) and [`Ruff`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/formatter/#format-suppression) — `# fmt: on`, `# fmt: off`.
- [`Mypy`](https://discuss.python.org/t/ignore-mypy-specific-type-errors/58535) — `# type: ignore`, `type: ignore[error-code]`.
- [`Coverage`](https://coverage.readthedocs.io/en/7.13.0/excluding.html#default-exclusions) — `# pragma: no cover`, `# pragma: no branch`.
- [`Isort`](https://pycqa.github.io/isort/docs/configuration/action_comments.html) — `# isort: skip`, `# isort: off`.
- [`Bandit`](https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/config.html#suppressing-individual-lines) — `# nosec`.

... and a lot others.

They seem very similar. But you know what? *There is no single standard for such comments*. Seriously.

The internal implementation of reading such comments is also different. Someone uses regular expressions, someone uses even more primitive string processing tools, and someone uses full-fledged parsers, including the Python parser or even written from scratch.

As a result, as a user, you need to remember the rules by which comments are written for each specific tool. And at the same time, you can't be sure that things like double comments (when you want to leave 2 comments for different tools in one line of code) will work in principle. And as the creator of such tools, you are faced with a seemingly simple task — just to read a comment — and find out for yourself that it suddenly turns out to be quite difficult, and there are many possible mistakes.

This is exactly the problem that this library solves. It describes a simple and intuitive standard for action comments, and also offers a ready-made parser that creators of other tools can use. The standard offered by this library is based entirely on a subset of the Python syntax and can be easily reimplemented even if you do not want to use this library directly.


## The language

So, this library offers a language for action comments. Its syntax is a subset of Python syntax, but without Python semantics, as full-fledged execution does not occur. The purpose of the language is simply to provide the developer with the content of the comment in a convenient way, if it is written in a compatible format. If the comment format is not compatible with the parser, it is ignored.

From the point of view of the language, any meaningful comment can consist of 3 elements:

- **Key**. This is usually the name of the specific tool for which this comment is intended, but in some cases it may be something else. This can be any string allowed as an identifier in Python.
- **Action**. The short name of the action that you want to link to this line. Also, only the allowed Python identifier.
- **List of arguments**. These are often some kind of identifiers of specific linting rules or other arguments associated with this action. The list of possible data types described below.

Consider a comment designed to ignore a specific mypy rule:

```
# type: ignore[error-code]
└-key-┘└action⊥arguments-┘
```

> ↑ The key here is the word `type`, that is, what you see before the colon. The action is the `ignore` word, that is, what comes before the square brackets, but after the colon. Finally, the list of arguments is what is in square brackets, in this case, there is only one argument in it: `error-code`.

Simplified writing is also possible, without a list of arguments:

```
# type: ignore
└-key-┘└action┘
```

> ↑ In this case, the parser assumes that there is an argument list, but it is empty.

The number of arguments in the list is unlimited, they can be separated by commas. Here are the valid data types for arguments:

- Valid Python identifiers. They are interpreted as strings.
- Two valid Python identifiers, separated by the `-` symbol, like this: `error-code`. There can also be any number of spaces between them, they will be ignored. Interpreted as a single string.
- String literals.
- Numeric literals (`int`, `float`, `complex`).
- Boolean literals (`True` and `False`).
- `None`.
- `...` (ellipsis).
- Any other Python-compatible code. This is disabled by default, but you can force the mode of reading such code and get descriptions for any inserts of such code in the form of `AST` objects, after which you can somehow process it yourself.

The syntax of all these data types is completely similar to the Python original (except that you can't use multi-line writing options). Over time, it is possible to extend the possible syntax of metacode, but this template will always be supported.

There can be several comments in the `metacode` format. In this case, they should be interspersed with the `#` symbol, as if each subsequent comment is a comment on the previous one. You can also add regular text comments, they will just be ignored by the parser if they are not in `metacode` format:

``` python
# type: ignore # This is a comment for mypy!
```

If you scroll through this text [above](#why) to the examples of action comments from various tools, you may notice that the syntax of most of them (but not all) is it can be described using `metacode`, and if not, it can be easily adapted to `metacode`. Read on to learn how to use a ready-made parser in practice.


## Installation

Install it:

```bash
pip install metacode
```

You can also quickly try out this and other packages without having to install using [instld](https://github.com/pomponchik/instld).


## Usage

The parser offered by this library is just one function that is imported like this:

```python
from metacode import parse
```

To use it, you need to extract the text of the comment in some third-party way (preferably, but not necessarily, without the # symbol at the beginning) and pass it, and the expected key must also be passed as the second argument. As a result, you will receive a list of the contents of all the comments that were parsed:

```python
parse('type: ignore[error-code]')
```
